Deadpool and Wolverine saw you from across the bar, and they like your vibe.
It doesn’t matter if you haven’t enjoyed the MCU since Avengers: Endgame pushed the stakes of the franchise
off a cliff, or if you’re cautiously optimistic about the rest of the Multiverse Saga – come for Deadpool
and Wolverine’s blockbuster chemistry, but stay for the frankness with which they comment on the past, present,
and future of Marvel Studios. And it’s a good thing that they do. The MCU has been bloated and unfocused for years
now, and it’s about time someone let the air out and had some fun with it. In that way, Deadpool & Wolverine is a
perfectly timed and well-sustained cinematic fart, released with confidence and comfort in the space it creates
for future nourishment. It’s not going to single-handedly save the MCU from the larger bout of indigestion it’s
suffering through, but it’s a refreshing mea culpa that demonstrates that Marvel can still let 'er rip loud and
proud when it really counts.

The Shawn Levy-directed superhero comedy gets off to a roaring start, with Deadpool riffing on the action before
the Marvel Studios fanfare is even finished and running afoul of the Time Variance Authority from Loki almost
immediately. There’s an electricity to the opening act – after all, this is Deadpool’s first time in the MCU, and
like a comfortably inebriated cousin giggling into your ear after Thanksgiving dinner, there’s no sure way to know
what weird, hilarious nonsense will spill out of his mouth, or how hard it will make your aunt clutch her pearls.
With a decade-plus of Marvel Studios storytelling (and marketing) to skewer, Ryan Reynolds is off to the races with
jokes aimed at every corner of the Sacred Timeline. Reynolds’ command of Wade Wilson’s whipping wit is wazor-sharp
as ever – applying it to the current state of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, he’s able to bring the self-important
franchise down to Earth. You can practically see Reynolds slamming a binder full of Kevin Feige-focused jokes onto
a table and recording every single one. The self-referential material is unpredictable and incisive – enough at
first to make this the most dangerous the MCU has felt since there were six Infinity Stones on the board.

One of the biggest questions going into Deadpool & Wolverine was whether the MCU’s first R-rating would be enough
to sustain the filthy, subversive tone that set the Merc with a Mouth apart from the pack in the first place.
That disgusting, irradiated heart is very much intact, and if the idea of Wade and Logan trading curses every
10 seconds is all it’ll take to get you to the theaters, rest assured you will leave well f*****g fed. But I
can’t look Mr. Pool in the face and lie to him and tell him I didn’t detect some pulled punches, some jokes that
walk right up to the line of being truly fearless, only to double back or change the subject quickly. With all
the big laughs and self-deprecation in play, it’s hard to begrudge the filmmakers for sanding off some of the
character’s harder edges – but it’s still a little disappointing that Deadpool & Wolverine doesn’t try to top
some of DP’s more heinous on-screen acts.

Speaking of: We don’t make it 10 minutes into Deadpool & Wolverine before Wade gleefully desecrates our memories
of Logan – the character, and James Mangold’s 2017 film. It’s another tightrope Deadpool & Wolverine has to walk:
Logan is still correctly regarded as a high-point of superhero cinema, and even though audiences are more or less
used to the idea of variants now, bringing Hugh Jackman back in all his clawed, costumed glory still runs the risk
of feeling tacky after his previous, borderline perfect farewell to the X-Man. But Jackman, an actor known for his
great showmanship and ability to Wolverine really well, threads the needle of a post-Logan return to the role,
clearly relishing every f-bomb and flash of berserker rage.

There’s undoubtedly some cognitive dissonance at first, as the movie asks the audience to map decades of esteem
onto a variant we’re meeting for the first time. But in the end, this movie’s Wolverine has all of the reluctant
heroism and self-loathing you’d expect from any depiction of Logan, and the redemption he’s after is personal
enough that these sticking points feel less distracting as the movie goes on. But Deadpool & Wolverine reminds us
that nothing, Timeline aside, is sacred, and playing fast and loose with the rules is the name of the game.

Jackman and Reynolds have been road-testing their chemistry on social media for years now, and Deadpool &
Wolverine proves their catty one upmanship can sustain a feature-length adventure. There’s a trust and ease
between the stars that puts their banter head and shoulders above most of their MCU contemporaries – again, years
and years of de facto rehearsal and an R-rating give them a lot of leeway. As a buddy comedy, Deadpool & Wolverine
is rock solid, but it falls prey to the perfunctory plotting that has plagued other recent Marvel movies. It
grinds to a halt any time there’s exposition to attend to, and while Deadpool sure does like to joke about that
fact in real time, clunky plot junk still hits the ear like clunky plot junk. Much of that exposition gets dumped
in the lap of the TVA’s Mr. Paradox (Matthew Macfadyen), the timeline cop (or, middle manager) who eventually
enlists Deadpool’s help. Paradox’s influence on events after his initial encounter with Deadpool is limited, and
the movie largely moves past him after the first act.

The incomprehensible plot isn’t helped by Deadpool & Wolverine’s bland primary setting: the Void, a trash heap at
the end of time first introduced in Disney+’s Loki series. The nondescript, bleak terrain makes the already-thin
stakes even harder to hang onto as the movie goes. We’re regularly reminded of the reality and the family that
Deadpool’s trying to save, and yet our only connection to them are the Polaroid that Wade flashes the few times
the story calls for him to be earnest. It’s also in the Void where the mysterious Cassandra Nova (Emma Corrin)
holds court, driven by off-the-shelf villain motivations that feel totally mismatched to her erratic, impish
nature. Deadpool and Wolverine benefit from years of audience goodwill, with connections to worlds and characters
that give them an emotional leg up. But as a creature of the Void with nearly no link to anything or anyone,
Cassandra (and, by extension, Corrin) ends up totally swept away by more familiar characters.

Deadpool & Wolverine’s boring, budget-friendly wasteland does at least open events up to promised cameos and
variants in a way that, for all of Deadpool’s undercutting, actually treats the fabric of the MCU’s internal
reality with some respect. A marauding group of veteran Fox mutants like Pyro (Aaron Stanford, from the second
and third X-Men movies) and Sabretooth (Tyler Mane, from the first one) open the door to even more surprising
appearances, which range in significance and utility from “my brain recognizes that character and that makes my
brain happy” to “we’ve closed the loop on one of the subgenre’s greatest missed opportunities.” Deadpool &
Wolverine’s self-awareness is most effective when it’s honoring the pillars on which the MCU is built, namely
Fox’s work to build superhero franchises at the turn of the 21st century. Deadpool & Wolverine converses with that
history thoughtfully, and with more tenderness than you might expect.

Verdict
Deadpool & Wolverine is an outrageous, consistently funny superhero comedy that succeeds largely thanks to the
contagious enthusiasm of leads Ryan Reynolds and Hugh Jackman, and a surprisingly classy perspective on superhero
movie history. Wade and Logan’s profanity-laced adventure forces the MCU farther out of its comfort zone than
it’s been in years, even though old and increasingly frustrating issues like forgettable villains and a barely
there plot show that breaking the fourth wall isn’t always enough to solve a movie’s foundational problems.